  
## The Only Thing Constant Is Change: Part 2: Chapter 6: Science

I was often told that science is the best tool for studying the world because it explains it. However, it does not explain why things are one way or the other, science only explains how things work. I hope I was able to demonstrate that the why question is answered through the philosophical examination.

The chief problem of all sciences is that they are siloed. Chemistry lives separately from physics, physics apart from biology, mathematics knows nothing of computer science, and so on. It is good from a design standpoint, to keep systems separated to ensure they maintain their focus and scope, but it still could benefit from sharing common foundational ground, allowing people studying these subjects to not have a kaleidoscoping understanding of the world, but rather a united one that allows to see that there are reference frames where phenomenal world is consistent and understandable.

In this chapter, I will further build my understanding of the phenomenal world by trying to find a common ground for all sciences.

Logic and math are considered to be the foundational knowledge behind all sciences. Immanuel Kant said that “in any special doctrine of nature there can be only as much proper science as there is mathematics therein” (4:470). The reason why these sciences have the highest possible status is because these subjects are not mixed with the phenomena of the world of experience, they are based on apriori knowledge, the innate knowledge that our mind has access to. It is easy to see that we know logic even without learning it because as soon as we speak any language, we already use, albeit often incorrectly, logical structures like implications, syllogisms, negations, and many more without even realizing it. Logic as a science is about clarification of these patterns, putting them in order, and combining them. It does not concern itself with creating knowledge, only clarifying. All of this knowledge is already inside us, it is about how our reason works. It tells us that a lot of answers are already hidden inside us.

Math is logic on steroids. Adding simple rules and axioms and building structures from them using logic an entire body of knowledge is produced. This is not just about clarification but about the production of knowledge. Immanuel Kant called this “synthetic apriori knowledge”.

Because math concerns itself with the most fundamental manipulation of categories for creating structures and because phenomena from the world of experiences are also structures that correspond to structures inside our minds, and according to Immanuel Kant we are studying exactly these structures and not the world “itself”, it is no wonder that math is called the language of the universe. This is why physics is so mathematical in nature. Physics is where mathematics meets the phenomenal world, where it meets change. We are just confining math to a very specific frame of what we call the “physical world” that has space, time, energy, and mass and certain rules, or laws. The core concept in physics is energy, which is a parameter of a system that tells how much change is inside a given system. I think energy is a rather confusing term and could be changed into “amount of conflict”. Because motion is relative in physics, energy is only possible in a system of more than one entity, because in such systems a conflict is possible because entities might intersect in space and time and cause conflict that would need to be resolved by change, which is called Force in physics. Physics then explains all phenomena from the standpoint of energy and forces, which is why it is such a fundamental study of the phenomenal world. However, it isn’t possible to extrapolate and see that change and amount of conflict isn’t only about atoms and molecules, but other structures that we observe from the phenomenal world, like storytelling, music, and any human activity for that matter because any activity is about conflict resolution as we already discussed.

Unlike inorganic matter, living organisms are an interesting phenomenon. What is true of organisms is also true of non-organic matter, but organisms have qualities that matter doesn’t. Living beings are informational systems, that is they carry information according to which they develop and maintain themselves. It is widely believed that living beings were just a result of evolution, but evolution is itself a process that only information systems are capable of. In fact, the system “population + natural selection” is an informational system because it already has rules and feedback mechanisms necessary for adaptation. When there is information, there is a mind behind it. In the world of phenomenons, information is carried in the form of signals, like audio waves, electric impulses, DNA sequences, and so on, but these carriers are not information themselves, information is what that signal wants to say, and what it wants to say is a structure of mind, and not part of the phenomenal world.

Lastly, I want to examine computer science because nothing rings in more unison with the entire book than the process of developing software, especially software applications. In software development, we build structures, just like we build understanding. The key requirement for this structure is that it needs to correspond to a correctly working program. However, a structure that lies behind a correctly working program still might be very messy and cause similar problems that a poor understanding of the world would. Software is part of the phenomenal world and as such is subject to conflicts and change. That is why it is called software — because it needs to be adaptable to changes in requirements. Therefore, a proper structure should not only be correct but also adaptable. However, it can only be adaptable if the concepts behind it are both simple and show an understanding of the conflicts that result in the change of requirements in the first place. For example, if we are building a banking application, choosing to hardly separate accounts and cards might result in a situation where cards might stand for a form of account, and if cards exist as a completely different entity, it might cause a lot of headaches implementing similar functionality for both of them. The conflict behind the change was that users needed to perform similar operations on both types. Or there could be a situation where multiple systems store user data, and at some point, a new system needs to be developed that wants to combine the user data, because there is no single source of truth about users, this project might fail due to complexity of interactions and reconciliations of getting the information. The conflict behind the project was that users wanted to obtain information in one place that would satisfy a specific need.

To conclude, this chapter examined sciences from the reference frame of the mind and the concepts we discussed in the previous chapters and allowed me to find common ground behind all sciences to help me in building a comprehensive understanding of the world.
